---
layout: post
title: "Software Engineering Stories Part One"
date: 2021-02-16 23:00:00 -0600
categories: non-tech
---

The other day I was chatting with a teammate about mentoring. That conversation lit the spark to start this series. June of 2021 will mark ten years in the industry as a software developer. Over that time I have had a few experiences that centered around non-technical skills. I find the best way to share those lessons learned is through stories. There will be stories where I am not proud of my behavior but there is an important lesson to learn. I’ll start it off with one of those.

First, let’s set the scene. I had just moved to Urbandale and had a recruiter help me get a job at a crop insurance company. I was backfilling someone on the GIS team. I knew a DBA at the company who warned me about joining that team. I was pretty skeptical going into the situation on my first day. I joined a team of two, the manager and the lead developer.

To dive into the project I picked up some smaller pieces of work. There isn’t much to the project, mostly just a front-end website and a back-end server to feed data. I quickly found several technical issues that I thought were critically wrong. For starters, the DB model was being fed directly out to the front-end. There was no separation between the DB and the UI model. This is generally not the preferred structure in a mature application but is very common in smaller applications. I saw this and immediately did a WTF?!?! The next issue was linked to a defect where something was not behaving in the UI. I tracked it down to a race condition in the browser. The UI was using vanilla JavaScript with JQuery. I have seen several JS frameworks used and I couldn’t understand why not pick one. Generally, any framework will help you structure your code. The last big scary thing I found was the SQL used to pull the primary model. It was about 300 lines long formatted. No, I’m not exaggerating. It heavily leveraged Oracle functions. On previous teams, I had been taught to offload as much load as possible from the DB. It is usually a single resource that can only scale vertically, while your application interacting with the DB can usually be scaled horizontally. 

I went to chat with the architect for some guidance and advice. This was a few years so I don’t remember all of what he had to say. I know it was somewhere along the lines that I wasn’t crazy for wanting to make the changes I was looking for and that I needed to talk with the team to get them on board. All of the issues combined are solvable and I was hesitant but willing to help change these things that I saw as critical issues. Now the way I remember it, I had a chat with the other two team members about the changes I wanted to implement and why I saw them as necessary. I left the meeting with a general agreement that the manager and the lead developer were open to change. The next task I worked on required pulling new data from the DB. There was no way I was going to add more to the massive query and I thought we could define this as an independent model. I created a new model object and domain access object to store the new SQL. Within a week of committing that change, the lead developer went through the back-end code and refactored several things. One change was to delete the new domain access object I created and pulled the new SQL into the same file with the monster query. He didn’t say a word to me that he was doing it. I was fuming when I found that. 

I sent a message to my manager’s boss asking for time to talk. During that meeting, I very bluntly asked to be moved to a different team. I had been feeling hesitant about putting in the amount of effort needed to bring around the changes I wanted. The actions that directly conflicted with the changes I wanted to bring to the project; pushed me over the edge. I made up my mind to quit and give up on the project and the team. To finish out the story, I was moved to a different team. Relations with team members severely degraded while the details of my move were being ironed out.

Now for the lessons learned. Let me start by saying I am not proud of the actions I took. This is not a story about best practices or examples of what to do. The experience was invaluable for me. I could have gone slower bringing changes into the project. I could have waited until I had a better relationship with the lead developer. If that had happened, I might have had a better understanding of his personality and had been able to anticipate his reaction to changes. Regardless of the obstacles or the personalities between you and your goals; there are always actions you can take to make progress.
